Abortion in Utah is legally performed under a temporary restraining order blocking enforcement of the state's trigger law, which bans abortion. According to HB136, which is effective state law from June 28, 2022, abortions are banned following 18 weeks of gestation. Abortion was banned following the Supreme Court case, Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization on June 24, 2022. Utah State Legislation enacted SB 174 in May 2020, which, upon the overturn of Roe v. Wade, made inducing an abortion a second-degree felony. The law includes exceptions for pregnancies "caused by rape or incest," pregnancies that put the mother's life at risk, or "if two doctors say the fetus has a lethal defect." Rape and incest exceptions will only be viable if the crimes were previously reported to law enforcement officials.A 2014 Pew Research Center survey found that 51% of Utah adults said abortion should be illegal in all or most cases with 47% saying it should be legal, and a 2022 joint Deseret News/Hinckley Institute of Politics poll found 46% of Utahns thought abortion should be legal only in cases of rape, incest, or threats to mothers’ health.
The number of abortions performed annually in Utah has dropped over the decades with 4,796 abortions performed in 1990 and 2,922 performed in 2019. In 2019, 61.8% of abortions performed in Utah were due to socioeconomic reasons.

Terminology
The abortion debate most commonly relates to the "induced abortion" of a pregnancy, which is also how the term is used in a legal sense. Some also use the term "elective abortion", which is used in relation to a claim to an unrestricted right of a woman to an abortion, whether or not she chooses to have one. The term elective abortion or voluntary abortion describes the interruption of pregnancy before viability at the request of the woman, but not for medical reasons.Anti-abortion advocates tend to use terms such as "unborn baby", "unborn child", or "pre-born child", and see the medical terms "embryo", "zygote", and "fetus" as dehumanizing. Both "pro-choice" and "pro-life" are examples of terms labeled as political framing: they are terms which purposely try to define their philosophies in the best possible light, while by definition attempting to describe their opposition in the worst possible light. "Pro-choice" implies that the alternative viewpoint is "anti-choice", while "pro-life" implies the alternative viewpoint is "pro-death" or "anti-life". The Associated Press encourages journalists to use the terms "abortion rights" and "anti-abortion".

Context
Free birth control correlates to teenage girls having a fewer pregnancies and fewer abortions, according to a 2014 New England Journal of Medicine study.  At the same time, a 2011 study by Center for Reproductive Rights and Ibis Reproductive Health also found that states with more abortion restrictions have higher rates of maternal death, higher rates of uninsured pregnant women, higher rates of infant and child deaths, higher rates of teen drug and alcohol abuse, and lower rates of cancer screening.According to a 2017 report from the Center for Reproductive Rights and Ibis Reproductive Health, states that tried to pass additional constraints on a women's ability to access legal abortions had fewer policies supporting women's health, maternal health and children's health.  These states also tended to resist expanding Medicaid, family leave, medical leave, and sex education in public schools. According to Megan Donovan, a senior policy manager at the Guttmacher Institute, states have legislation seeking to protect a woman's right to access abortion services have the lowest rates of infant mortality in the United States.Poor women in the United States had problems paying for menstrual pads and tampons in 2018 and 2019. Almost two-thirds of American women could not pay for them. These were not available through the federal Women, Infants, and Children Program (WIC). Lack of menstrual supplies has an economic impact on poor women.  A study in St. Louis found that 36% had to miss days of work because they lacked adequate menstrual hygiene supplies during their period.  This was on top of the fact that many had other menstrual issues including bleeding, cramps and other menstrual induced health issues. This state was one of a majority that taxed essential hygiene products like tampons and menstrual pads as of November 2018.

History
Legislative history
By 1950, the state legislature of Utah passed a law stating that a woman who had an abortion or actively sought to have an abortion, regardless of whether she went through with it, was guilty of a criminal offense. Since the early 1980s, Planned Parenthood has been Utah's only Title X grantee and only abortion service provider in the state.The state was one of 23 states in 2007 to have a detailed abortion-specific informed consent requirement. The informed consent materials in South Dakota, Texas, Utah and West Virginia given to women seeking abortions include counseling materials that say women who have abortions may have suicidal thoughts or experience "post-abortion traumatic stress syndrome," which is not recognized by American Psychological Association or the American Psychiatric Association. In 2013, state Targeted Regulation of Abortion Providers (TRAP) law applied to medication-induced abortions and private doctor offices in addition to abortion clinics. There was a pending bill in Utah in early 2018 to prohibit women from requesting their doctors perform abortions as a result of getting a Down syndrome diagnosis during her pregnancy. The bill was co-sponsored by Republican state Sen. Curt Bramble. In 2019, only 24% of the state legislators were female.In 2019, the Utah legislature passed a bill limiting abortions after 18 weeks of pregnancy. In 2020, the legislature passed Senate Bill 174 "Abortion Prohibition Amendments" sponsored by Daniel McCay. The bill is a near-total ban on abortion, with exceptions for rape, incest, and the mother’s health, but would only go into effect if Roe v. Wade was overturned.

Judicial history
The US Supreme Court's decision in 1973's Roe v. Wade ruling meant the state could no longer regulate abortion in the first trimester.

Clinic history
Between 1982 and 1992, the number of abortion clinics in the state declined by one, going from seven in 1982 to six in 1992. In 1996, the state had seven abortion clinics and was one of only three to gain clinics in the period between 1982 and 1996. In 2014, there were two abortion clinics in the state. In 2014, 97% of the counties in the state did not have an abortion clinic. That year, 62% of women in the state aged 15–44 lived in a county without an abortion clinic. In 2017, there were nine Planned Parenthood clinics, of which one offered abortion services, in a state with a population of 727,940 women aged 15–49. In March 2019, Planned Parenthood Association of Utah was the only abortion provider in the state.

Statistics
In the period between 1972 and 1974, there were zero recorded illegal abortion deaths in the state. In 1990, 202,000 women in the state faced the risk of an unintended pregnancy. In 2013, among white women aged 15–19, there were 290 abortions, 10 abortions for black women aged 15–19, 60 abortions for Hispanic women aged 15–19, and 20 abortions for women of all other races. In 2014, 51% of adults said in a poll by the Pew Research Center that abortion should be illegal in all or most cases with 47% saying it should be legal. In 2017, the state had an infant mortality rate of 5.9 deaths per 1,000 live births, compared to the national average of 5.8 deaths per 1,000 live births. In 2022, a Deseret News/Hinckley Institute of Politics survey found 46% of Utahns said abortion should only be legal in cases of rape, incest, or threats to mothers’ health.

Public Responses
Protests
In a 2019 national "Stop the Bans" protest, hundreds of Utahns gathered to protest several laws which limited or banned abortion across the United States. The largest protest took place outside the Utah State Capitol, in Salt Lake City. A smaller protest also took place in the city of Provo. In both events, protesters called on state legislators not to pass any laws further restricting abortion. The protests also centered around bills from other states, particularly Ohio, Alabama, and other southern states.

Activism
Much of the anti-abortion movement in the United States and around the world finds support in the Roman Catholic Church, the Christian right, the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod, the Church of England, the Anglican Church in North America, the Eastern Orthodox Church, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church).The position of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that "elective abortion for personal or social convenience is contrary to the will and the commandments of God" but that abortion may be justified where the pregnancy endangers life of the mother, where the pregnancy is the outcome of rape or incest, or the fetus is not viable.

Footnotes


== References ==