Abortion in Oklahoma is illegal unless the abortion is necessary to save the life of a pregnant woman in a medical emergency, or the pregnancy resulted from an act of rape, sexual assault, or incest that has been reported to law enforcement. Even then, abortions in cases of rape, sexual assault, or incest are permitted only during the first six weeks of pregnancy, as a separate Oklahoma statute prohibits abortion after six weeks with no exceptions for rape or incest.Oklahoma's abortion ban took effect on May 25, 2022, when Governor Kevin Stitt signed HB 4327 into law, and abortion providers have ceased offering services in Oklahoma as of that date. HB 4327 is modeled after the Texas Heartbeat Act and is enforced solely through civil lawsuits brought by private citizens, making it exceedingly difficult for abortion providers to challenge the constitutionality of the statute in court. Oklahoma is the first state to successfully ban abortion from the moment of fertilization since Roe v. Wade.The number of abortion facilities in Oklahoma has declined over the years, with eighteen in 1982, eleven in 1992 and three in 2014. There were 4,916 legal abortions in 2014, and 4,709 in 2015. There are currently no abortion providers offering services in Oklahoma on account of HB 4327.

Terminology
The abortion debate most commonly relates to the "induced abortion" of a pregnancy, which is also how the term is used in a legal sense. Some also use the term "elective abortion", which is used in relation to a claim to an unrestricted right of a woman to an abortion, whether or not she chooses to have one. The term elective abortion or voluntary abortion describes the interruption of pregnancy before viability at the request of the woman, but not for medical reasons.Anti-abortion advocates tend to use terms such as "unborn baby", "unborn child", or "pre-born child", and see the medical terms "embryo", "zygote", and "fetus" as dehumanizing. Both "pro-choice" and "pro-life" are examples of terms labeled as political framing: they are terms which purposely try to define their philosophies in the best possible light, while by definition attempting to describe their opposition in the worst possible light. "Pro-choice" implies that the alternative viewpoint is "anti-choice", while "pro-life" implies the alternative viewpoint is "pro-death" or "anti-life". The Associated Press encourages journalists to use the terms "abortion rights" and "anti-abortion".

Context
Free birth control correlates to teenage girls having fewer pregnancies and fewer abortions. A 2014 New England Journal of Medicine study found such a link.  At the same time, a 2011 study by Center for Reproductive Rights and Ibis Reproductive Health also found that states with more abortion restrictions have higher rates of maternal death, higher rates of uninsured pregnant women, higher rates of infant and child deaths, higher rates of teen drug and alcohol abuse, and lower rates of cancer screening. The study singled out Oklahoma, Mississippi and Kansas as being the most restrictive states that year, followed by Arkansas and Indiana for second in terms of abortion restrictions, and Florida, Arizona and Alabama in third for most restrictive state abortion requirements.According to a 2017 report from the Center for Reproductive Rights and Ibis Reproductive Health, states that tried to pass additional constraints on a women's ability to access legal abortions had fewer policies supporting women's health, maternal health and children's health.  These states also tended to resist expanding Medicaid, family leave, medical leave, and sex education in public schools. According to Megan Donovan, a senior policy manager at the Guttmacher Institute, states have legislation seeking to protect a woman's right to access abortion services have the lowest rates of infant mortality in the United States.Poor women in the United States had problems paying for menstrual pads and tampons in 2018 and 2019. Almost two-thirds of American women could not pay for them. These were not available through the federal Women, Infants, and Children Program (WIC). Lack of menstrual supplies has an economic impact on poor women.  A study in St. Louis found that 36% had to miss days of work because they lacked adequate menstrual hygiene supplies during their period.  This was on top of the fact that many had other menstrual issues including bleeding, cramps and other menstrual induced health issues. This state was one of a majority that taxed essential hygiene products like tampons and menstrual pads as of November 2018.

Legislative history
By 1950, the state legislature would pass a law that stated that a woman who had an abortion or actively sought to have an abortion regardless of whether she went through with it was guilty of a criminal offense.The state passed a law in the 2000s banning abortions after 22 weeks because they alleged that a fetus can feel pain. The state was one of 23 states in 2007 to have a detailed abortion-specific informed consent requirement. The law required materials be created by the state's health development. In the informed consent materials given to women in Idaho, Oklahoma, South Dakota and Texas required by statute, the materials used graphic and inflammatory language. The law also required the woman be told how far advanced her pregnancy was. Arkansas, Minnesota and Oklahoma all require that women seeking abortions after 20-weeks be verbally informed that the fetus may feel pain during the abortion procedure despite a Journal of the American Medical Association conclusion that pain sensors do not develop in the fetus until between weeks 23 and 30. Informed consent materials about fetal pain at 20 weeks in Arkansas, Georgia and Oklahoma says, "the unborn child has the physical structures necessary to experience pain."  The Journal of the American Medical Association has concluded that pain sensors do not develop in the fetus until between weeks 23 and 30.A 2009 Oklahoma law, overturned by a federal court in 2010, would have required doctors to report information from a 37-question form about every woman receiving an abortion to the state health department for publication in an online registry. A lawyer for the Center for Reproductive Rights, a co-plaintiff in the lawsuit challenging the law, said the law would have made public potentially identifying details about women, and was intended to dissuade women from seeking abortions. Todd Lamb, who sponsored the law as a state senator, called it "essential in protecting the sanctity of life" and "pro-life". A fetal heartbeat bill (SB 1274) was signed into law by then-Oklahoma governor Mary Fallin in April 2012 that requires an abortion provider to offer a woman the opportunity to hear the conceptus's heartbeat before ending the pregnancy, and applies when the conceptus is at least eight weeks old. The bill took effect in November 2012.In 2013, state Targeted Regulation of Abortion Providers (TRAP) law applied to medication induced abortions in addition to abortion clinics. In 2016, Oklahoma state legislators passed a bill to criminalize abortion for providers, potentially charging them with up to three years in prison. On May 20, 2016, Governor Mary Fallin vetoed the bill before it could become law, citing its wording as too vague to withstand a legal challenge. The state legislature was one of four states nationwide that tried, and failed, to pass a fetal heartbeat bill in 2016.In 2017, the state was one of six where the legislature introduced a bill that would have banned abortion in almost all cases.  It did not pass. They were also one of eight states trying to pass a fetal heartbeat bill that year. The state legislature tried and failed to ban abortion again in 2018. They also tried and failed to pass a fetal heartbeat bill that year. In mid-May 2019, state law banned abortion after week 22.In 2022, the Oklahoma State Legislature passed a bill to make being convicted of performing an abortion a felony and be punishable by up to 10 years in prison and a $100,000 fine, with the exception only in the case that the woman's life is in danger. However, a criminal charge would not be brought upon a woman seeking or receiving an abortion. On April 12, 2022, Governor Kevin Stitt signed the bill, saying "I promised Oklahomans that I would sign every pro-life bill that hits my desk, and that's what we're doing here today." The bill has not gone into effect yet, but if the bill is not struck down by the effective date, then the bill will go into effect on August 25, 2022, 90 days after the legislature adjourns.

Judicial history
The US Supreme Court's decision in 1973's Roe v. Wade ruling meant the state could no longer regulate abortion in the first trimester. On November 4, 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal by the state of Oklahoma to the overturning, on constitutional grounds, of a bill intended to ban the practice of terminations of early pregnancies via medications.In March 2020, Governor Kevin Stitt signed an executive order to limit elective medical procedures, later confirming that all types of abortion services were included, except for those necessary in a medical emergency or to "prevent serious health risks" to the pregnant woman. On April 6, federal judge Charles Barnes Goodwin blocked the executive order, ruling that the state acted in an arbitrary, unreasonable, and oppressive way, which posed an undue burden on abortion access in Oklahoma.

Clinic history
Between 1982 and 1992, the number of abortion clinics in the state decreased by seven, going from eighteen in 1982 to eleven in 1992. In the period between 1992 and 1996, the state saw no change in the total number of abortion clinics. While only three states saw gains in this period, this state was one of four to see no changes with 11 abortion clinics in the state in 1996. In 2014, there were three abortion clinics in the state. In 2014, 96% of the counties in the state did not have an abortion clinic. That year, 54% of women in the state aged 15–44 lived in a county without an abortion clinic. In 2014, 51% of adults said in a poll by the Pew Research Center that abortion should be legal in all or most cases. In 2017, there were six Planned Parenthood clinics, of which one offered abortion services, in a state with a population of 882,108 women aged 15–49.The first new clinic to provide abortion care opened in Oklahoma City in 2016, Trust Women Oklahoma City.

Statistics
In the period between 1972 and 1974, there was one illegal abortion death in Oklahoma. In the same period, the state had an illegal abortion mortality rate per million women aged 15–44 of between 0.1 and 0.9. In 1990, 328,000 women in the state faced the risk of an unintended pregnancy. In 2010, the state had no publicly funded abortions. In 2013, among white women aged 15–19, there were 460 abortions, 110 abortions for black women aged 15–19, 0 abortions for Hispanic women aged 15–19, and 140 abortions for women of all other races. In 2017, the state had an infant mortality rate of 7.7 deaths per 1,000 live births.

Abortion rights views and activities
Protests
Women from the state participated in marches supporting abortion rights as part of a #StoptheBans movement in May 2019. Many Oklahoman's who were supportive of abortion started protesting following restrictions on the procedure that were signed into law in May 2022. In June 2022, additional protests across several cities such as Oklahoma City, Norman, and Tulsa had risen substantially after the Supreme Court's ruling on Roe v. Wade.

Footnotes


== References ==