A series of ongoing protests supporting abortion rights and anti-abortion counter-protests began in the United States on May 2, 2022, following the leak of a draft majority opinion for the U.S. Supreme Court case Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, which stated that the Constitution of the United States does not confer any right to abortion, thus overturning Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey. On June 24, 2022, the Supreme Court officially overturned Roe and Casey in Dobbs, resulting in further protests outside of the U.S. Supreme Court building and across the country.

Background
Leaked draft opinion
On May 2, 2022, Politico released a first draft of a majority opinion written by Justice Samuel Alito, the authenticity of which Politico said it had verified. The draft opinion would overturn Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey if held by the majority and thereby finalized in that form. Alito's draft decision called the Roe decision "egregiously wrong from the start" on the grounds that abortion is not listed in the United States Constitution as a protected right, and instead would allow states to decide on abortion restrictions or guarantees under the Tenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.Shortly after the release of the document, multiple protests occurred in cities throughout the country and outside the U.S. Supreme Court Building in Washington, D.C., along with multiple individuals such as lawyers, politicians, and activist groups speaking out about the leaked draft.

Overturning of Roe v. Wade
On June 24, 2022, in a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court officially overturned Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey. The decision was divisive among the American public, with 55 to 60% opposed to the overturning of Roe, and was generally condemned by international observers and foreign leaders, resulting in further protests.

Protests before the ruling
According to The Hill, the Reproductive Freedom Protest (RFP) planned walkouts at more than 20 U.S. universities, including Brown University, Florida International University, Georgetown University, Hamilton College, Purdue University, the University of California, Berkeley, the University of Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth University, and Virginia Tech.

Midwest
Illinois saw protests in Bloomington, Chicago, Peoria, Rockford, and Springfield. On May 7, more than 1,000 abortion-rights protesters met and marched in downtown Chicago. Governor J. B. Pritzker and Lieutenant Governor Juliana Stratton spoke to the crowd in Federal Plaza. On May 14, thousands of abortion rights protesters met and marched in Union Park and Beverly in Chicago. On May 20, a majority of students at Lake Forest High School in Lake Forest walked out in protest of the leaked draft Supreme Court decision.

More than a dozen people gathered at Four Freedoms Monument in Evansville, Indiana. In Indianapolis, pro-abortion and anti-abortion protesters gathered outside downtown's federal courthouse. Approximately 30 protesters assembled outside the Tippecanoe County Courthouse in Lafayette, including state representative Chris Campbell. On May 22, protesters returned to the Four Freedoms Monument in Evansville.In Iowa, there were demonstrations in Cedar Rapids and Des Moines. Additionally, approximately 100 students held a protest at Northview Middle School in Ankeny. Americans for Democratic Action Iowa organized a rally in Waterloo.In Michigan, the Ann Arbor event was held outside the federal building. Dozens of people attended the rally outside the Theodore Levin United States Courthouse in Detroit, including Cynthia A. Johnson and Rashida Tlaib. Approximately 250 people rallied outside the Kent County Courthouse in Grand Rapids. Approximately 300 people participated in the demonstration at the Michigan State Capitol in Lansing, including a dozen or so anti-abortion activists. Stephanie Chang spoke at the rally. The rally outside Midland's County Courthouse was organized by the Women of Michigan Action Network and attended by approximately 150 people. On May 10, several speakers including abortion providers and president of the Detroit City Council were scheduled to speak at Spirit Plaza. Michigan Attorney General Dana Nessel left the event before being introduced after several of the speakers were interrupted by protesters. On May 14, about 2.000 protesters at the University of Michigan campus in Ann Arbor and 500 protested in downtown Detroit. Hundreds of anti-abortion and abortion-rights protesters marched in front of Grand Rapids City Hall.  On June 8, dozens of abortion rights activists protested in the gallery of the Michigan House in Lansing.

In Minnesota, there were demonstrations in Minneapolis and Saint Paul. In Missouri, there were protests in Kansas City, Springfield, Joplin,  and St. Louis. A demonstration was held in Omaha, Nebraska.Ohio saw protests in Cincinnati, Columbus, Dayton, Toledo, and Youngstown. Additionally, students gathered at the Kent State University campus in Kent. More than a thousand protesters showed up in Cleveland's Willard Park for the Bans Off Our Bodies march on May 14.  On June 12, dozens of abortion rights protestors gathered in Toledo.In Wisconsin, demonstrations were held in La Crosse, Madison, and Milwaukee. On May 22, protesters rallying for abortion rights gathered in Green Bay.  On June 12, dozens of abortion rights protestors marched in Greenfield.

Northeast
Connecticut saw protests in Bridgeport, New Haven, and Norwalk. Students and faculty also protested at Quinnipiac University's Mount Carmel campus in Hamden. In Maine, there were protests in Bangor and Portland. Additionally, students held demonstrations at Bates College in Lewiston and Edward Little High School in Auburn.In Portland, Maine, dozens of abortion rights activists debated and shouted with 5 to 10 anti-abortion protesters at Monument Square on May 13.In Massachusetts, approximately 1,000 people participated in the rally at Boston Common. Pro-abortion and anti-abortion students held rallies at the Harvard University campus in Cambridge. A demonstration was held in Longmeadow on Mother's Day. On Nantucket, people assembled at Brant Point Light. Approximately 30 people gathered outside City Hall in North Adams. The Northampton rally was held at City Hall. Mayor Joseph Petty attended the event in Worcester, as did members of Pathways for Change. Students from Clark University marched from campus to the Worcester Courthouse.New Hampshire saw protests at the New Hampshire State House in Concord.

In New Jersey, hundreds protested in Montclair and at the Somerset County Courthouse in Somerville. Additionally, approximately 100 people gathered outside Nassau Hall on the Princeton University campus in Princeton. On May 13, a group of seniors organized a rally attended by former New Jersey State Senator Loretta Weinberg at the Arbor Terrace senior housing center in Teaneck. On May 14, hundreds rallied at Mindowaskin Park in Westfield. On May 16, an abortion-rights rally at Hunterdon Central Regional High School lead to some pushing and shoving between students.Pennsylvania saw protests in Allentown, Lancaster, Philadelphia, and Pittsburgh. Protests were also held in Providence, Rhode Island, and Essex Junction, Vermont. On May 14, nearly a thousand protesters rallied around the Pittsburgh City-County Building and about 150 rallied in Bethlehem for the Bans Off Our Bodies event.

New York
On May 3, protesters gathered at the New York State Capitol in Albany. Kathy Hochul spoke at the event. In Ithaca, approximately 100 people gathered at the Ithaca Commons Bernie Milton Pavilion, including students from Cornell University and Ithaca College. In New York City, more than 1,000 people gathered at Foley Square in Lower Manhattan. Letitia James and students from Trinity School were in attendance. Demonstrators also met at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, and in New Springville, Staten Island. In Orange County, demonstrators gathered outside of Assemblyman Colin Schmitt's office. In Syracuse, hundreds of people assembled at downtown's federal building. The rally was organized by Women's March Syracuse.On May 7 in Long Island, hundreds protested in Mineola and Central Islip. Speakers included Senator Chuck Schumer, Attorney General Letitia James, Assemblymember Gina Sillitti and State Senator Anna Kaplan at the Nassau County Courthouse.On June 7, topless activists with messages like "Hell no!" and "My Body, My Choice" written on their bodies disrupted a WNBA game between the New York Liberty and the Minnesota Lynx at Barclays Center in Brooklyn.

South
Demonstrations were held in Birmingham, Alabama, Fayetteville, Arkansas, and Wilmington, Delaware.  In Maryland, there was a protest in Baltimore, and approximately 100 people gathered outside the homes of Justices Brett Kavanaugh and John Roberts in Chevy Chase on May 7.In Georgia, there were protests in Athens, Atlanta, and Savannah. Kentucky saw demonstrations in Lexington and Louisville. There was a protest in New Orleans, Louisiana. On May 21, a protest occurred in Augusta.In Mississippi, protests increased in Jackson outside the Jackson Women's Health Organization, the state's last abortion clinic which is the plaintiff in the case which overturned Roe v. Wade. On May 3, the director announced that they would move their office to New Mexico if the Supreme Court rules against them. In North Carolina, there were demonstrations in Asheville and Raleigh. There were also protests in Norman and Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and in Charleston, South Carolina.North Carolina saw hundreds protesting Greensboro, Winston-Salem, Raleigh and Asheville on May 14.
In Tennessee, protesters marched from Miller Park to the Hamilton County Courthouse in Chattanooga. Approximately 100 people gathered at Founders Park in Johnson City. Approximately 100 people gathered outside Knoxville's Howard H. Baker Jr. Courthouse for the "Knoxville Rally to Defend Roe. Wade", which was organized by the Women's March Coalition and the Knoxville Center for Reproductive Health. Hundreds gathered outside the federal courthouse in Nashville. On May 14, dozens protested in Bristol, Tennessee.Texas saw demonstrations in Amarillo, Austin, Bryan, Dallas, El Paso, Houston, and San Antonio.  Dozens gathered outside the Tarrant County Courthouse in Fort Worth. Beto O'Rourke organized an abortion-rights rally that saw thousands gather at Discovery Green in downtown Houston. On May 14, a Bans Off Our Bodies rally was held in Austin that featured speakers state Representative Donna Howard and U.S. Representative Lloyd Doggett. On June 5, three activists organized by Rise 4 Abortion Rights stripped down to their underwear during services at megachurch pastor Joel Osteen's Lakewood Church in Houston.In Virginia, protests were held in Norfolk, Richmond, and Roanoke. Protests were planned by the Virginia League of Planned Parenthood, the groups Shutdown DC and Ruth Sent Us promoted vigils, walk-by and demonstrations outside of Justice Samuel Alito and conservative justices homes in Maryland and Virginia.

Florida
In Florida, demonstrations were held in Bradenton, Fort Lauderdale, Gainesville, Jacksonville, Miami, Orlando, St. Augustine, St. Petersburg, Tallahassee, Tampa, and West Palm Beach. Approximately 100 people gathered in Stuart.More than 100 people gathered outside St. Petersburg's courthouse for a rally organized by state representative Michele Rayner and the Pinellas Democratic Progressive Caucus; separately, the Party for Socialism and Liberation in Tampa Bay held an abortion-rights rally that was attended by an estimated 150 to 250 people according to organizers. Approximately 100 people participated in the demonstration outside the Supreme Court of Florida in Tallahassee; the event was supported by the activist group Tallahassee Community Action Committee. Approximately 75 people attended the rally at Tampa's Joe Chillura Courthouse Square, including U.S. Representative Kathy Castor.On June 10, a synagogue in Boynton Beach filed a lawsuit against the state of Florida regarding their 15-week abortion ban, stating that the ban violated religious freedom of Jews.

Washington, D.C.
There were no arrests at the protest in Washington, D.C., which attracted both pro-abortion and anti-abortion protesters to the Supreme Court Building. A planned group protest was held on May 14, and organized by Woman's March, Planned Parenthood Federation of America, the Service Employees International Union, and other pro-abortion rights organizations, to coincide with more than 370 events across the United States. The permit for the event showed an expected attendance of 17,000 people and includes a march and speakers.On June 6, a man chained himself to a fence in front of the Supreme Court building in support of abortion rights.

West
Alaska saw protests in Anchorage, Fairbanks, and Haines. In Arizona, hundreds protested in Phoenix and Tucson. Additionally, two women organized a demonstration in San Luis, Arizona.In Colorado, there were demonstrations in Aspen, Colorado Springs, Denver, Fort Collins, and Grand Junction. A demonstration was held in Boise, Idaho.Hawaii faced protests outside the District of Hawaii courthouse in Honolulu as well as other places like Waimea. Montana saw protests in Billings, Bozeman, Helena, and Missoula. A protest was also held in Las Vegas, Nevada.In New Mexico, there were demonstrations in Albuquerque, Las Cruces, and Santa Fe. On May 14, Albuquerque saw more than 200 protesters gather at Tiguex Park and march around Old Town.In Oregon, approximately 200 people gathered outside the Deschutes County Courthouse in Bend. The "Rally for Womb Rights: We Will Never Go Back" event in Eugene was held outside the Wayne Lyman Morse United States Courthouse. Several hundred people participated in the rally at Lownsdale Square in downtown Portland. There was some damage by "splinter groups", which was condemned by mayor Ted Wheeler, and one person was arrested. On May 3, hundreds marched from Riverfront Park to the Oregon State Capitol in Salem. On May 14, protesters on both sides of the issue gathered in front of the Federal Courthouse in Eugene. On May 15, about 400 protesters gathered in front of the Oregon State Capitol in Salem for the second annual "Defend Roe" rally, organized by "Pro Choice with Heart."In Utah, protests were held in Salt Lake City and St. George. On May 14, about 4,000 protesters rallied at the Utah State Capitol for a Bans Off Our Bodies protest.In the state of Washington, there were demonstrations in Bellingham, Olympia, Richland,  Spokane, Tacoma, Vancouver, and Walla Walla. Additionally, approximately 60 people gathered at the Clallam County Courthouse in Port Angeles, and dozens gathered outside the courthouse in Port Townsend. A demonstration was also held in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. In Seattle, protests were held at Westlake Park downtown on May 3 and on May 5, a protest was organized by students on the campus of the University of Washington.

California
California saw protests in Chico, Long Beach, Monterey, Oakland, Orange County, Sacramento, San Francisco, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Santa Clarita, and Stockton. In Berkeley, students gathered at Sproul Plaza on the University of California campus. On May 14, thousands marched across the San Francisco Bay Area.Protests in Los Angeles, near Pershing Square, turned violent as demonstrators clashed with the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), resulting in several arrests and an officer receiving a head injury. A tactical alert was issued for all LAPD personnel in Los Angeles. By 11pm, it was downgraded to only cover downtown. On May 7, approximately 100 people rallied in West Hollywood. Approximately 100 students also gathered at Pomona College in Claremont. People assembled at Meyerhoff Park outside Kerckhoff Hall on the University of California, Los Angeles campus. On May 14, a Bans Off Our Bodies protest was held at Jastro Park in Bakersfied.In San Diego, hundreds of protesters marched downtown on May 4. Dozens of students protested outside Geisel Library on the University of California, San Diego campus on May 6. On Mother's Day May 7th, hundreds of women and men marched through Balboa Park.On May 21, around 50 high school students organized an abortion-rights protest in Sebastopol.

Outside the United States
Hundreds attended a demonstration at Dam Square in Amsterdam. Two people were arrested. A demonstration was also held in Battersea, London. In Australia a protest took place in Perth on the Monday immediately after the decision. Further protests are also planned around Australia, with at least one in every major city being planned.

Women's March
Women's March, along with Planned Parenthood and other abortion-rights groups, organized large-scale marches across the United States on May 14.

Response
Women's March supported the national demonstration. Multiple politicians made comments about the protests and those protesting after the leaked opinion, with some causing debates and past comments or actions brought into the discussion. Representative Matt Gaetz (R-FL) used Twitter to claim any women participating in the protests were "over-educated, under-loved millennials who sadly return from protests to a lonely microwave dinner with their cats, and no Bumble matches". Rebekah Jones and Margaret Schiller, both Democrats seeking the district seat, responded by referencing an ongoing federal investigation into allegations that Gaetz had traveled out of state to have sex with a teenage girl.

About protests outside private homes
After protests outside of the homes of Justices John Roberts and Brett Kavanaugh in early May 2022, White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki tweeted that while President Joe Biden was a strong believer in the constitutional right to protest, it should never include violence, threats, or vandalism. Psaki added that Judges were a highly important function in the United States and must be able to do their jobs without concern for personal safety. The U.S. Capitol Police and the National Fusion Center Association alerted to potential violence in Washington, D.C., against the nine justices and their staffs as well as nationwide against abortion-related advocacy groups and First Amendment-protected events. In May, senators Chris Coons (D-DE) and John Cornyn (R-TX) introduced legislation to allow Supreme Court Police to provide all nine justices and their families 24-hour protection. The bill passed the U.S. House of Representatives on June 14 in a 396–27 vote, with opposition from some New Jersey Democrats who wished to broaden the bill to also protect the family members of Supreme Court staff, and was signed into law by President Biden on June 16.Republicans argued that those protests violate a 1950 federal law that criminalizes attempting to influence a judge in the course of their official duties by demonstrating at their residence. Maryland governor Larry Hogan and Virginia governor Glenn Youngkin cited the law in a request to the U.S. Department of Justice for adequate resources to protect the justices and their families. Justice Clarence Thomas said the Supreme Court would not "be bullied" by the demonstrators. Senator Ted Cruz (R-TX) stated in an interview with Maria Bartiromo on Fox News that the protests at the Justices homes were "mob violence to get their partisan outcome"; however, reports from both protests claimed to show no violence and about 100 protestors attending the protests.On May 16, Florida governor Ron DeSantis signed a law making it a second-degree misdemeanor to protest in front of private citizen's homes in Florida, saying, "Sending unruly mobs to private residences, like we have seen with the angry crowds in front of the homes of Supreme Court justices, is inappropriate."

Protests after the ruling
On June 24, 2022, anti-abortion and pro-abortion rights activists demonstrated outside the Supreme Court building following the decision to overturn Roe and Casey. By noon, there was a major police presence around the Supreme Court building and the Capitol building, including police with riot gear, and police squad cars and SUVs. Multiple streets were barricaded by police.Protests also occurred in cities and towns across the country, drawing large crowds of demonstrators, with many activists calling for more action from Democratic lawmakers.On June 30, more than 180 abortion rights protesters were arrested in Washington, D.C. after sitting and blocking an intersection near the Supreme Court.On July 4, abortion rights protests were held across the country, including Washington, D.C., New York City, Philadelphia, Boston, Los Angeles, Sacramento, San Francisco, San Diego, Portland, Seattle, Chicago, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Springfield, Madison, Milwaukee, Lansing, Detroit, Bloomington, Columbus, Cleveland, Cincinnati, Denver, Charlotte, Asheville, Atlanta, Roanoke, Birmingham, Tampa, Miami, Las Vegas, Albuquerque, Salt Lake City, San Antonio, Austin, and Houston.On July 9, another day of abortion rights protests occurred in cities across the country, with over 10,000 people marching in Washington, D.C.On July 19, 35 abortion rights protesters including 17 members of Congress were arrested in Washington, D.C. after blocking an intersection near the Supreme Court.

Midwest
Illinois saw a protest in Chicago on June 24 with thousands marching to Grant Park. Among those in attendance included Governor J. B. Pritzker. Additional protests and marches were held in downtown Chicago the following day. Another protest with hundreds of participants was held in downtown Naperville.In Indiana, a rally was held at Indianapolis's Monument Circle on the evening of June 24. On June 25, more than 1,000 abortion-rights and 200 anti-abortion demonstrators descended on the Indiana Statehouse. Demonstrations were also reported in Bloomington, Evansville, Fort Wayne,Lafayette, and South Bend.Iowa saw protests in Des Moines and Cedar Rapids. During a protest in Cedar Rapids near the U.S. District Court Federal Court House, a truck ran over a woman's foot.In Topeka, Kansas, protesters gathered outside the Kansas State Capitol.Michigan saw protests in Ann Arbor and Detroit with thousands of participants. Around 200 demonstrated at the Michigan State Capitol in Lansing. Protests were also held in Grand Rapids and Kalamazoo.In Minnesota, anti-abortion and pro-abortion rights events were held in Minneapolis and Saint Paul. A protest was held in St. Cloud at the Stearns County Courthouse.In Missouri, a protest was held with at least 300 participants at the Mill Creek Park in Kansas City.  Another protest occurred a week later, with over 1,000 abortion rights protesters gathering and marching in Kansas City.  On July 10, a group of protestors marched onto Interstate 64 in downtown St. Louis.Hundreds protested on June 24 in Memorial Park in Omaha, Nebraska.In Ohio hundreds of protesters gathered at the Ohio State Capitol in Columbus. Other protests were held in Akron,Bowling Green, Cincinnati, and Cleveland.  On July 10, a group of abortion rights protesters in Cleveland camped out in front of City Hall for a week.In Wisconsin, thousands of protesters gathered and marched in Madison,  Milwaukee, Appleton, Eau Claire, Kenosha, Wausau, Marshfield, Stevens Point, Sheboygan, La Crosse and Green Bay.

Northeast
Thousands protested in New Haven, Connecticut on June 24. On the same day over a hundred protesters gathered in downtown Stamford and the New Milford Town Green.In Maine over a thousand protesters gathered in Portland in front of Portland City Hall. On June 30, hundreds of abortion rights protestors gathered in Lewiston.In Maryland protests were held in Annapolis and Baltimore.In Massachusetts thousands of protesters marched in Boston near the Boston Public Library.Over 100 protesters gathered outside Worcester City Hall and began chanting.In New Jersey, protests in Teaneck, Morristown and South Orange were held on June 24. On June 26, protests continued for a third day in Fair Lawn, Jersey City and Hoboken. A rally supporting the decision was held outside the Statehouse Annex in Trenton was organized by New Jersey Right to Life.An estimated 17,000 protesters gathered in Washington Square Park in New York City to demonstrate against the ruling, with thousands more in Union Square. Others were spread throughout Grand Central Station, Bryant Park, and city streets.In Pennsylvania protests were held in Erie, Lancaster, Philadelphia, and Pittsburgh.A protest was held outside the Rhode Island State Capitol on June 24. The Providence Police Department stated they were investigating an officer running for Rhode Island State Senate after he allegedly assaulted a political opponent during the protest while off-duty.Protests were held in multiple cities in Vermont, including Bennington, Brattleboro, Burlington, Montpelier and Rutland, Vermont.

South
In Alabama protesters marched from the Alabama Department of Archives and History to the Alabama State Capitol in Montgomery on June 26. Protests were also held in Birmingham, Huntsville, and Mobile.Around 200 protesters gathered outside the Arkansas State Capitol in Little Rock.In Florida protests were held outside the Florida State Capitol in Talllahassee, the Wynwood neighborhood of Miami,Tampa, and St. Petersburg.In Georgia, hundreds of abortion rights protestors gathered in Atlanta. A group of abortion rights protestors stayed on the Georgia State Capitol steps for over a week following the protests.In Louisiana, hundreds of protesters gathered in New Orleans, marching from Lafayette Square to City Hall.Hundreds turned out to protest in various cities in North Carolina, including Charlotte, Asheville, Raleigh, and Wilmington.In South Carolina, a protest was held on June 25 in Greenville.In Nashville, Tennessee, hundreds gathered at the Legislative Plaza on June 24. Protesters also gathered along Poplar Avenue in Memphis, as well as Founder's Park in Johnson City.In Kentucky, protests were held in Louisville, Lexington, Frankfort, and Bowling Green.In Mississippi, protests were held in Jackson,Gulfport and Hattiesburg.Texas saw protests in Austin, Dallas, Denton, Houston, and San Antonio.In Virginia, hundreds protested at Lafayette Park in Norfolk, and in Richmond hundreds marched from the Federal Court building to City Hall chanting protests.

West
California saw protests in multiple cities in the Bay Area, including Oakland, San Jose, San Mateo, and San Francisco. Los Angeles saw protests in both Downtown and Hollywood. Other protests occurred in San Luis Obispo and the California State Capitol in Sacramento. On June 25, former child actress Jodie Sweetin (Full House) was thrown to the ground by police while protesting on a ramp of the 101 Freeway in Los Angeles.In San Diego County, thousands attended a candle light vigil in Waterfront Park and then marched through downtown San Diego on June 24. Hundreds more protested on June 25. Dozens protested outside Escondido City Hall in San Diego County. Santee saw a protest on June 27.A protest was held outside the Colorado State Capitol in Denver.A protest was held in Boise, Idaho outside city hall.Thousands gathered for a protest in Downtown Portland, Oregon. 10 people were arrested at a June 24 protest in Eugene.Protesters demonstrated outside the Utah State Capitol in Salt Lake City on June 24. Protests were also held in Provo on June 25.In Washington, thousands of people protested in Westland Park and Downtown Seattle.

Arizona
Protests began in Phoenix around 7:00 p.m. MST June 24 in response to the overturning of Roe v. Wade. Demonstrations moved to the Arizona State Capitol, with it being mostly peaceful. Protestors began banging on the building around 8:30 p.m., prompting an evacuation of lawmakers and staff, which led to SWAT officers being deployed around the building. The protests were later called "an insurrection aimed at overthrowing the state government" by Republican Senate President Karen Fann which was similar to a statement by Arizona state police which claimed they were forced to fire tear gas after violent protestors attempted to break into the building. On June 25 a smaller number of people protested with four people arrested on suspicion of rioting and disorderly conduct, including an identified member of the National Lawyers Guild Legal Observer. Thousands more marched again in Phoenix on July 1.

Outside the United States
Protests against the ruling were also held in Berlin, Buenos Aires, Mexico City, Paris, outside the American Embassy in London, Sydney and Melbourne among other cities in Australia, in Montreal and other cities in Quebec, and outside the American Embassy in Dublin. A rally was also held at the U.S. consulate in downtown Toronto.

Notes
See also
Abortion in the United States
United States abortion-rights movement
United States anti-abortion movement

References
External links
 Media related to 2022 abortion rights protests in the United States at Wikimedia Commons